>> Brian Holt: Okay, so
let's go ahead and,
>> Brian Holt: Take a look at how to
do this.
>> Brian Holt: This requires about 50
lines of code.
>> Brian Holt: So
you're gonna create
a function here called, so
the snapshot thing is how I'm able
to show the visualization there,
so you can just basically ignore it.
>> Brian Holt: And
I gave you here, basically, the guts.
So you're gonna have a createMaxHeap
function, a heapify function,
and then the heapSort,
which is intern going to call both of
those functions internally from heapSort.
So let's start with the create max-heap,
it's a pretty simple one.
All you're gonna do is you're
gonna start with a for loop and
say let i is 0.
>> Brian Holt: Sorry,
i = Math.floor,
>> Brian Holt: Of
array.length divided by 2,
and i is greater than or
equal to 0, and then i minus minus, right?
So you're gonna start from
the middle of the array and
go backwards.
>> Brian Holt: Then you're
just gonna call heapify on array, i, and
array length.
>> Brian Holt: And
you're gonna return to the array.
>> Brian Holt: So
the array, right, that makes sense.
The index of where we currently are,
that probably makes sense as well,
cuz we're gonna be heapifying.
And then we have to give it the heap size,
because remember when we're doing the heap
sort part of it, the heap size makes a
difference of where and how far it can go.
And you don't want it to go to the end of
the array when we're doing heap sort cuz
otherwise it would mess up
the sorted part of the list.
We wanna progressively make
our heap smaller and smaller,
which is why we're passing in heap size.
>> Brian Holt: So let's take
a look at what heapify looks like.
>> Brian Holt: So
here you're going to do,
>> Brian Holt: We'll call it at the end,
>> Brian Holt: Const left = 2.
So this is gonna be the left
child times index +1.
Const right = 2 times index + 2.
>> Brian Holt: So you're gonna say
let largest ValueIndex =
index.
>> Brian Holt: Then here I'm
just gonna ask, if the left child bigger?
Is the right child bigger?
And if one of them was bigger,
then I'll swap them.
If one of them's not bigger,
then I'll leave it, right?
So I'm going to ask if
heapSize, that is,
yeah, yeah, yeah.
So if heapSize is like out of
bounds that I'm not gonna check it,
which is what you're doing here,
then you're gonna say end array.
>> Brian Holt: Array largest value index
is less than array of left, right?
So,
>> Brian Holt: So the first time
the largest value, you could just
as easily put index here as well.
I just think it's a little
bit easier to read this way.
So if left is greater than the parent,
right?
The index,
then we're gonna swap the left child in.
So largestValueIndex = left,
if(heapSize
>> Brian Holt: If
right is in bounds,
then you're gonna say and
array largestValueIndex.
Array right.
>> Brian Holt: Then
you're gonna say
largestValueIndex = right.
Okay?
So now I know for
a fact that the largest value index
is definitely contained in this one.
It's either the parent,
the left child, or the right child,
after doing these two comparisons.
Then I'm gonna say if
the largestValueIndex
is not equal to, index, right?
So If either the left child or the right
child is bigger then we have to do a swap.
If it is the parent,
then you just leave it.
Cool, do you follow?
>> Brian Holt: Okay,
then what we're gonna do
is just do a swap, right?
const temp = array[index];
array[index] =
array[largestValueIndex].
>> Brian Holt: Then,
you're just gonna say
array[largestValueIndex] is
gonna be assigned temp.
>> Brian Holt: And
then at this point, if you remember,
if we do heapify something,
we have to heapify
the child that's swapped.
Because we have to guarantee that
order still maintains further
down the tree as well.
So only if one of the swaps happens,
we're gonna call it heapify on
the array at the largestValueIndex.
And heapSize,
>> Brian Holt: Does
that make sense?
>> Student1: Are you keeping track of
the heapSize, because you're slowly making
it smaller until the whole thing is
sorted?
>> Brian Holt: Exactly.
>> Student1: Okay.
>> Brian Holt: So the heap continues to
get smaller and smaller and smaller.
If I included the entire
array every single time,
I would swap something to the end,
and then it would just get moved
back up to the front.
>> Student1: Okay,
you would never sort it.
>> Brian Holt: Yeah.
>> Student1: Okay.
>> Brian Holt: But that's astute.
>> Student2: I think you have the wrong
greater and less-than on the right check.
>> Brian Holt: I don't think so.
>> Student2: Cuz you're saying the current
one is greater than the right one, but
you're assigning right to the current or
to the largest.
>> Brian Holt: Right.
No, you're right, here.
I was looking at this one.
>> Student2: Yeah.
>> Brian Holt: You were correct,
thank you.
>> Brian Holt: Okay,
so now I have heapify.
I have createMaxHeap.
So definitely when I call createMaxHeap,
at the end of that whole process I
will have a valid MaxHeap, okay?
So what I'm gonna do here in
heapSort the first thing I'm going
to do is say that array is assigned
createMaxHeap of the array.
So now array is an assorted max heap.
Then I'm gonna have this temp variable and
I'm gonna say for(let i = 0,
>> Brian Holt: Sorry let i = array.length
-1, cuz you can you don't have to start,
yeah you don't have to do the last one
cuz by that point it will be sorted.
i > 0 and i --.
>> Brian Holt: Okay?
So what you're gonna do is
you're gonna say temp go to
the end.
>> Brian Holt: Or
rather temp is going to be the first item.
array[0] is going to become array at i,
right?
Because we're going to be swapping these.
>> Brian Holt: array
i is going to be assigned temp,
heapSize--,
and then you're gonna call
heapify with the array, 0, right?
Cuz heapify, you're always starting
from the beginning, right,
because that's the one you swapped in.
And heapSize which is
progressively getting smaller each
time that you do it.
>> Student2: Where are you setting
heapSize?
>> Brian Holt: Right here,
the -- previous to it.
>> Brian Holt: And
I didn't do it up here,
no you're right, up here,
let heapSize start as the array.length.
>> Brian Holt: So
again, just to walk you through it.
Treat your variables up here,
heapSize is going to be
the entire array the first time.
We're going to make the array a max heap,
which we do here by calling heapify on
every individual item in the array, right?
Or rather, make sure that every
item gets affected by a heapify,
which is why you start in the middle.
Because remember, it's 2n plus 1, which
means if I'm heapifying from the middle,
it's going to be looking
at the end of the array.
Which is why that works.
Heapify just goes through, and just makes
sure that the parent is always larger than
the children,
that's the entire gist of that.
If not, it sweeps, it swaps them and
then it makes sure to call heapify
on the children that it swapped.
Only the children that it swapped.
Once we've done that we have a max
heap and we can go from there.
And just be swapping out items and
calling heapify on the zero element.
So, hopefully,
that gives us a sorted array.
It does.
>> Brian Holt: How do you
feel about heaps?
Does that make some sense?
Cool.
It's a little difficult
to explain this a little,
It's not terribly concrete
until you actually see it.
But yeah, hopefully that explains it.
If you wanna see what it looks like
when you do a lot more numbers,
you can just swap these tests out, run it.
>> Brian Holt: And
you can see that the nice
pretty colored gradients.